Welcome back to A Course in Python programming.
Today I've got a very exciting tutorial prepared for you.
We're talking about the While loop.
So let's dive straight into it.
I've got a new computer notebook opened.
Let's give this one a name.
This is going to be the while loop.
So go ahead and create one of these as well so we can follow along with the code as you can see here
.
Very remove the toolbar because we don't need it.
We're going to be using shortcuts and we need to save some space and if we really need to you can also
remove this top hitter as well.
All right so what is the while loop and what is it used for.
So first thing I wanted to mention that if you're taking this course for learning Python for data science
and darn it looks think then chances are that you've heard about the our programming language maybe
you've even taken my course in our programming.
So here I wanted to mention that there is a difference between Python and are there actually many differences
even though both tools can be used for data science.
There are many differences and one of them is that Python is not a vectorized programming language so
our is a vectorize programming language and a lot of the operations there all of the analytics and data
mining and visualization of things are done through a vectorized approach and that is a great advantage
of our programming language and it allows you to avoid creating loops all the time so you can use the
Apply family functions and you can just work with vectors throughout the whole programming language
of our.
And most of the times you'll be able to avoid working with Fluke's whereas Python is an object oriented
programming language and unfortunately we can have best of both worlds.
You have to it's like a tradeoff and you have to choose one or the other either vectorized or Object-Oriented
and therefore in Python you don't have that luxury of working with vectors although you do have lots
of other advantages will which you will see throughout the course but at the same time you don't have
that advantage of working with vectors and therefore you'll find yourself working or creating loops
more often than you would in are.
So therefore this tutorial is very important to understand the basis of what loop's artist is going
to be our first loop the while loop.
Then we'll look at other loops throughout this course.
But at the same time story is important and we're going to look at the While loop now and I'll show
you how it works in Python so it's important to get your head around it to understand the concept of
lives.
All right so first thing I'm going to do is I'm going to demonstrate what a WHILE loop would normally
look in a programming language.
So we're talking like languages like R or C C++ or in Java.
So you know all the standard more common programming language so let's have a look at this.
Normally you see a WHILE loop look like this a while than normal brackets than here.
And then curly braces inside the normal brackets you would have a condition and then inside the curly
braces you would have executable code is a horrible code line one.
And then you would have line to line three.
All right so this is how it would look like in other programming languages.
And before we move on to how it looks like in Python let's try to understand what this construction
does.
So what this construction does is once it is executed this condition is checked.
So Python or the programming language will check this condition and then it will go through the curly
braces and execute all of the code here.
If the condition is true then one Sig's action is complete.
What'll happen is if you have more code here let's say executable code for what will happen is Python
won't or the programming language won't move forward to the next exhibit usable code.
It will actually go back to the start of this block and will check the condition again if the condition
is true again.
It will execute this code and then once it gets to this curly bracket it will come back again.
Ill check the condition.
So that's what's going to keep happening.
The programming language will keep coming back.
Checking the condition executing the code checking the condition executing the code checking the condition
exit Kennicott and that will keep going and that's what's called the loop.
And as soon as the condition becomes false or whenever it finds that the condition is false it will
not execute the code it will proceed to further lines of code which follow.
So that is how a while loop works.
Now let's have a look at how the while loop is structured in Python in Python a while loop is structured
differently.
The reason behind it is because that is one of the ideas of Python to make everything super simple to
make everything very legible to make the code look very static.
So this is what it looks like in Python.
While condition colon and no curly braces so no normal braces no curly braces just a colon after the
condition.
And the question here is how does Python know when our while loop ends where our the body of the while
loop.
And how does it distinguish between this executable code for an executable code 3 2 and one so let's
say the condition is part is true so Python will execute this line this line this line and then I'll
go back and check the condition and then execute these lines again.
How does it know where to stop is that curly braces right so this is a very interesting thing and a
lot of time of the times when programmers just start using Python.
They get very surprised by this.
And the reason that Python does now is because of these tabulations or because of these indentations
.
And this is where we come to the concept which is very unique for Python among programming languages
Tabulation or the proper term here is.
Indentation is important indentation is a part of the syntax of this programming language so very important
to understand that if I for instance remove the indentation here then the body of the while loop has
been reduced to just these two lines of code.
So that is why it's important to observe indentation and to maintain it properly as per your code whereas
in other programming language it doesn't matter.
You could put more in detail than you could with less indentation as long as the curly braces are there
.
Everything makes sense in Python.
There's no curly braces.
This is one of those situations.
So it's important to observe indentation.
All right so hopefully all that makes sense.
I know it might be very new if this is your first time working with Python but we'll get used to it
as we go through the code.
Let's look at an example.
All right.
So I'm going to remove this template and here we'll just look at our first while we'll say while false
call on.
And you can see as soon as I put the colon and press enter.
The invitation is set there for me by Jupiter.
So now I'm going to say print and hello.
And what will happen is Python will take this condition because it's false.
It won't even go inside the loop.
So basically spins around this nothing will happen.
As you can see nothing happened there.
Now if I take the opposite loop if I say true what we've created here is effectively an infinite loop
.
If I were on this line what will happen is Python will check this condition it's true it'll print the
hello.
They don't check the condition it's true will print hello and I will keep doing that and will actually
get stuck.
So let's go ahead and just for interest sake let's run this and see what happens.
So you can see we've got all these halos.
You can see it's running.
If you look up here you see it's busy.
Right.
So your tab is busy your browser is probably hung.
I can't even scroll here I can't do anything.
So basically it just keeps running.
So one way to stop it is to press double zero on your machine or on your keyboard.
That should stop it actually.
As you can see there we go.
So I was able to restart the kernel that's by pressing double zero.
Hopefully this will work.
This is always a mess so try to avoid creating infinite loops.
All right I'm going to kind of like scroll down.
Well there's no point in scroll down because there's so many of them.
So I'm going to get rid of the cell.
In fact the best way I found is to just refresh this page.
That's the beauty of working in a browser on your local machine so hopefully that will bring us something
up.
All right so there we go.
Let's just try and now get rid of this line.
So there we go we got rid of that line.
And always a bad idea.
Taran infinite loops Let's try create a proper loop that actually makes sense.
So let's say while let's create a counter a variable called counter and let's say equal 0 and then we'll
say while counter is less than 12 call on and then we'll print the value of counter that'll say counter
equals counter plus 1.
So what's going on here.
We've got a variable called counter which starts at zero.
By the way indexation in Python starts at zero so it's also a good idea to stand start counters at zero
.
That's another difference to our programming language where indexation starts at 1.
So here we've got a while counter's less than 12.
We want to print the value of this variable and at the same time we want to increase this variable by
one so we take its current value plus 1 and then we put it into that same variable.
And so basically the program or Python will come here or see that culture 0 is less than 12 correct
.
It'll exhibit this code then Connor has already become one.
One is still less than 12 legs.
Get this code and I'll keep doing that until color becomes 12 12 is not less than 12 we'll stop.
So let's have a look at that.
I'll press shift center as you can see zero one two three four five up to 11.
OK.
So that is how our while loop works.
You can experiment with that you can change the value of counter or this condition and maybe put other
parameters inside the while loop so I can show you an example that are works of indentation so here
I say print hello.
You'll see that hello will only get printed once.
If I run that you'll see 0 up to 11 and then it prints hello because.
First thing is counted gets its value then this loop is executed many many many times and then once
that is done then only Helo's printed.
So hopefully you enjoyed the story will have a play around with that to try creating your own loops
and experiment with for a while and I'll look for you next time.
Until then heavy coding